Connect to Kafka PL/PSC service from TiDB Cloud (#19323)
pingcap/docs: tidb-cloud/setup-self-hosted-kafka-pls.md

---
title: Setup Self-hosted Kafka Private Link Service in AWS
summary: This document explains how to set up private link service for self-hosted Kafka in AWS and how to make it work with TiDB Cloud.
---

> # Setup Self-hosted Kafka Private Link Service in AWS

Reviewer: I think this document is too long. If the kafka service is already deployed, it's hard to extract efficient information to know how to integrate with tidb cloud by private link for existing kafka service. So I think we can divide to two documents, and the one is setup private link with new-deployed kafka service, and the other is setup private link with existing kafka service.

Author: Yes, you are right.

Author: restructure the doc as following:
### Prerequisites
### First, Setup Kafka Cluster
#### Deploy a New Kafka Cluster
#### Reconfigure a Running Kafka Cluster
### Second, Expose Kafka Cluster as Private Link Service
### Third, Connect from TiDB Cloud

4. We will leverage Kafka bootstrap mechanism and AWS cloud resources to achieve the mapping.

Let's show how to connect to a three AZ Kafka private link service in AWS by example. It's not the only way to set up private link service for self-hosted Kafka. There may be other ways base on the similar port mapping mechanism. This document only used to show fundamental of Kafka private link service. If you want to set up Kafka private link service in production, you may need to build a more resilient Kafka private link service with better operational maintainability and observability.

![main idea](/media/tidb-cloud/changefeed/connect-to-aws-self-hosted-kafka-privatelink-service.png)

## Prerequisites
 
- Make sure that you create a TiDB Cloud Dedicated cluster first.
- Make sure you have authorization to set up Kafka private link service in your own AWS account.

## Steps

### Align Deployment Information with the TiDB Cluster

The steps: 

1. In the [TiDB Cloud console](https://tidbcloud.com), navigate to the cluster overview page of the TiDB cluster, and then click **Changefeed** in the left navigation pane.

> 2. In the overview page, you can find the region of TiDB Cluster, make sure your Kafka cluster will be deployed to the same region.

Author: fixed

3. Click **Create Changefeed**
   1. Select **Kafka** as **Target Type**.
   2. Select **Self-hosted Kafka** as **Kafka Provider**
   3. Select **Private Link** as **Connectivity Method**
4. Take note the AWS account arn in **Reminders before proceeding** information, which your will use it to authorize TiDB Cloud to create endpoint for the Kafka private link service.
5. Select **Kafka Type**, confirm you will deploy Kafka cluster to **Single AZ** or **3 AZ**. Here we select **3 AZ**. Take note of the AZ IDs you want to deploy your Kafka cluster. If you don't know the relationship between your AZ names and AZ IDs, please refer to [AWS document](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/ram/latest/userguide/working-with-az-ids.html) to find it.
6. Pick a unique **Kafka Advertised Listener Pattern** for your Kafka Private Link service
   1. Input a unique random string can only include numbers or lowercase letters, which will be used to generate **Kafka Advertised Listener Pattern** later.

>    2. Click **Check usage and generate** button to check whether if the random string is unique and generate **Kafka Advertised Listener Pattern** which will be used to assemble EXTERNAL advertised listener for kafka brokers. 

Reviewer: `whether` and `if` are duplicate

Author: fixed

> ---

Reviewer 2: Preview: https://pingcap-docsite-preview-hvfal0j3g-hfxsds-projects.vercel.app/tidbcloud/setup-self-hosted-kafka-pls

title: Set Up Self-Hosted Kafka Private Link Service in AWS
summary: This document explains how to set up Private Link service for self-hosted Kafka in AWS and how to make it work with TiDB Cloud.
---

# Set Up Self-Hosted Kafka Private Link Service in AWS

This document describes how to set up Private Link service for self-hosted Kafka in AWS, and how to make it work with TiDB Cloud.

The mechanism works as follows:

1. The TiDB Cloud VPC connects to the Kafka VPC through private endpoints.
2. Kafka clients need to communicate directly to all Kafka brokers.

> 3. Each Kafka broker is mapped to a unique port within the TiDB Cloud VPC.

Author: ```suggestion
3. Each Kafka broker is mapped to a unique port of endpoints within the TiDB Cloud VPC.
```

    6. Enter a unique **Kafka Advertised Listener Pattern** for your Kafka Private Link service.
        1. Input a unique random string. It can only include numbers or lowercase letters. You will use it to generate **Kafka Advertised Listener Pattern** later.
        2. Click **Check usage and generate** to check if the random string is unique and generate **Kafka Advertised Listener Pattern** that will be used to assemble the EXTERNAL advertised listener for Kafka brokers. 

Note down all the deployment information. You need to use it to configure your Kafka Private Link service later.

The following table shows an example of the deployment information.

| Information     | Value    | Note    | 
|--------|-----------------|---------------------------|
| Region    | Oregon (`us-west-2`)    |  N/A |
| Principal of TiDB Cloud AWS Account | `arn:aws:iam::<account_id>:root`     |    N/A  |

> | AZ IDs                              | <ul><li>`usw2-az1` </li><li>`usw2-az2` </li><li> `usw2-az3`</li></ul>  | Align AZ IDs to AZ names in your AWS account.<br/>Example: <ul><li> `usw2-az1` => `us-west-2a` </li><li> `usw2-az2` => `us-west-2c` </li><li> usw2-az3 => `us-west-2b`</li></ul>  |

Author: ```suggestion
| AZ IDs                              | <ul><li>`usw2-az1` </li><li>`usw2-az2` </li><li> `usw2-az3`</li></ul>  | Align AZ IDs to AZ names in your AWS account.<br/>Example: <ul><li> `usw2-az1` => `us-west-2a` </li><li> `usw2-az2` => `us-west-2c` </li><li>`usw2-az3` => `us-west-2b`</li></ul>  |
```

> | AZ IDs                              | <ul><li>`usw2-az1` </li><li>`usw2-az2` </li><li> `usw2-az3`</li></ul>  | Align AZ IDs to AZ names in your AWS account.<br/>Example: <ul><li> `usw2-az1` => `us-west-2a` </li><li> `usw2-az2` => `us-west-2c` </li><li>`usw2-az3` => `us-west-2b`</li></ul>  |

Author: 三条映射关系构成一个 example， 所以不必用复数

    2. On the **Internet gateways Detail** page, in **Actions**, click **Attach to VPC** to attach the Internet Gateway to the Kafka VPC.
    3. Go to [VPC dashboard > Route tables](https://console.aws.amazon.com/vpcconsole/home#CreateRouteTable:). Create a route table to the Internet Gateway in Kafka VPC and add a new route with the following information:

       - **Name**: `kafka-vpc-igw-route-table`
       - **VPC**: `Kafka VPC`
       - **Route**: 
           - **Destination**: `0.0.0.0/0`
           - **Target**: `Internet Gateway`, `kafka-vpc-igw`

    4. Attach the route table to the bastion subnet. On the **Detail** page of the route table, click **Subnet associations > Edit subnet associations** to add the bastion subnet and save changes.

#### 2. Set up Kafka brokers

**2.1. Create a bastion node**

Go to the [EC2 Listing page](https://console.aws.amazon.com/ec2/home#Instances:). Create the bastion node in the bastion subnet.

- **Name**: `bastion-node`
- **Amazon Machine Image**: `Amazon linux`
- **Instance Type**: `t2.small`

> - **Key pair**: `kafka-vpc-key-pair`. Create a new key pair name `kafka-vpc-key-pair`. Download **kafka-vpc-key-pair.pem** to your local for following configuration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Key pair**: `kafka-vpc-key-pair`. create a new key pair named `kafka-vpc-key-pair`. Download **kafka-vpc-key-pair.pem** to your local for later configuration.
```

- Network settings

    - **VPC**: `Kafka VPC`
    - **Subnet**: `bastion`
    - **Auto-assign public IP**: `Enable`

>     - **Security Group**: create a new security group allow ssh from anywhere. PS: you may narrow the rule for safety in the production environment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - **Security Group**: create a new security group allow SSH login from anywhere. You might narrow the rule for safety in the production environment.
```

# 2. Configure EXTERNAL in "advertised.listeners" based on the "Kafka Advertised Listener Pattern" in "Prerequisites" section
# 2.1 The pattern for AZ(ID: usw2-az3) is "<broker_id>.usw2-az3.abc.us-west-2.aws.3199015.tidbcloud.com:<port>"
# 2.2 So the EXTERNAL can be "b3.usw2-az3.abc.us-west-2.aws.3199015.tidbcloud.com:9095", replace <broker_id> with "b" prefix plus "node.id" properties, replace <port> with a unique port(9095) in EXTERNAL advertised listener ports range 
# 2.3 If there are more broker role node in same AZ, you can configure them in same way
process.roles=broker,controller
node.id=3
controller.quorum.voters=1@{broker-node1-ip}:29092,2@{broker-node2-ip}:29092,3@{broker-node3-ip}:29092
listeners=INTERNAL://0.0.0.0:9092,CONTROLLER://0.0.0.0:29092,EXTERNAL://0.0.0.0:39092
inter.broker.listener.name=INTERNAL
advertised.listeners=INTERNAL://{broker-node3-ip}:9092,EXTERNAL://b3.usw2-az3.abc.us-west-2.aws.3199015.tidbcloud.com:9095
controller.listener.names=CONTROLLER
listener.security.protocol.map=INTERNAL:PLAINTEXT,CONTROLLER:PLAINTEXT,EXTERNAL:PLAINTEXT,SSL:SSL,SASL_PLAINTEXT:SASL_PLAINTEXT,SASL_SSL:SASL_SSL
log.dirs=./data
```

> **2.4.3 Create and execute a script**

Author: ```suggestion
**2.4.3 Start Kafka brokers**
```

rm -rf $KAFKA_LOG_DIR
mkdir -p $KAFKA_LOG_DIR

# Magic id: BRl69zcmTFmiPaoaANybiw, you can use your own
$KAFKA_STORAGE_CMD format -t "BRl69zcmTFmiPaoaANybiw" -c "$KAFKA_CONFIG_DIR/server.properties" > $KAFKA_LOG_DIR/server_format.log   
LOG_DIR=$KAFKA_LOG_DIR nohup $KAFKA_START_CMD "$KAFKA_CONFIG_DIR/server.properties" &
```

**2.5. Test the cluster setting in the bastion node**

1. Test the Kafka bootstrap.

    ```shell
    export JAVA_HOME=/home/ec2-user/jdk-22.0.2

    # Bootstrap from INTERNAL listener
    ./kafka_2.13-3.7.1/bin/kafka-broker-api-versions.sh --bootstrap-server {one_of_broker_ip}:9092 | grep 9092
    # Expected output, order may be different.
    {broker-node1-ip}:9092 (id: 1 rack: null) -> (
    {broker-node2-ip}:9092 (id: 2 rack: null) -> (
    {broker-node3-ip}:9092 (id: 3 rack: null) -> (

    # Bootstrap from EXTERNAL listener
    ./kafka_2.13-3.7.1/bin/kafka-broker-api-versions.sh --bootstrap-server {one_of_broker_ip}:39092
    # Expected output(last 3 lines), order may be different.
    # The differences of output from "bootstrap from INTERNAL listener" is that there are exceptions or errors since advertised listeners can not be resolved in Kafka VPC.

>     # We will make them resolvable in TiDB Cloud side and make it route to the right broker. 

Author: it's planned in a feature release

tar -zxf openjdk-22.0.2_linux-x64_bin.tar.gz
```

Execute the following script to test if the bootstrap works as expected.

```shell
export JAVA_HOME=/home/ec2-user/jdk-22.0.2

# Bootstrap from EXTERNAL listener
./kafka_2.13-3.7.1/bin/kafka-broker-api-versions.sh --bootstrap-server {one_of_broker_ip}:39092

# Expected output(last 3 lines), order may be different.
# There will be some exceptions or errors since advertised listeners can not be resolved in your Kafka network. 
# We will make them resolvable in TiDB Cloud side and make it route to the right broker. 
b1.usw2-az1.abc.us-west-2.aws.3199015.tidbcloud.com:9093 (id: 1 rack: null) -> ERROR: org.apache.kafka.common.errors.DisconnectException
b2.usw2-az2.abc.us-west-2.aws.3199015.tidbcloud.com:9094 (id: 2 rack: null) -> ERROR: org.apache.kafka.common.errors.DisconnectException
b3.usw2-az3.abc.us-west-2.aws.3199015.tidbcloud.com:9095 (id: 3 rack: null) -> ERROR: org.apache.kafka.common.errors.DisconnectException
```

## Step 2. Expose the Kafka cluster as Private Link Service

### 1. Set up the load balancer

> Create a network load balancer with four target groups with different ports. One is for bootstrap, and the others will map to different brokers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Create a network load balancer with four target groups with different ports. One target group is for bootstrap, and the others will map to different brokers.
```

3. Test the load balancer in the bastion node. This example only tests the Kafka bootstrap. Because the load balancer is listening on the Kafka EXTERNAL listener, the addresses of EXTERNAL advertised listeners can not be resolved in the bastion node. Note down the `kafka-lb` DNS name from the load balancer detail page, for example `kafka-lb-77405fa57191adcb.elb.us-west-2.amazonaws.com`. Execute the script in the bastion node.

    ```shell
    # Please replace {lb_dns_name} to the actual value
    export JAVA_HOME=/home/ec2-user/jdk-22.0.2
    ./kafka_2.13-3.7.1/bin/kafka-broker-api-versions.sh --bootstrap-server {lb_dns_name}:9092

    # Expected output(last 3 lines), order may be different.
    b1.usw2-az1.abc.us-west-2.aws.3199015.tidbcloud.com:9093 (id: 1 rack: null) -> ERROR: org.apache.kafka.common.errors.DisconnectException
    b2.usw2-az2.abc.us-west-2.aws.3199015.tidbcloud.com:9094 (id: 2 rack: null) -> ERROR: org.apache.kafka.common.errors.DisconnectException
    b3.usw2-az3.abc.us-west-2.aws.3199015.tidbcloud.com:9095 (id: 3 rack: null) -> ERROR: org.apache.kafka.common.errors.DisconnectException

>     # You can also try bootstrap in others ports 9093/9094/9095. It will succeed probabilistically since NLB in AWS resolve LB DNS to IP address of any availability zone and disable cross-zone load balancing by default. 
>     # If you enable cross-zone load balancing in LB, it will be certainly success. But it is unnecessary, and might cause potential cross-AZ traffic.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    # You can also try bootstrap in other ports 9093/9094/9095. It will succeed probabilistically because NLB in AWS resolves LB DNS to the IP address of any availability zone and disables cross-zone load balancing by default. 
    # If you enable cross-zone load balancing in LB, it will succeed. However, it is unnecessary and might cause additional cross-AZ traffic.
```
